(upbeat music)
All right, we're gonna talk
about four more kinds of loops.
We've got the for loop, the for of,
the for in, and the while loop.
These four are not nearly as popular
as the array methods that we're working with.
However, they do have their place in the language,
and you probably will run into them from time to time.
So the first one is for, and the way that it works
is you type for, you open and close your parentheses,
and you open and close your block.
The for loop requires three things.
It requires, if we look at the docs here,
if we scroll down, it requires an initial expression,
a condition, and an increment expression.
The plain for loop is great for running a block of code
n number of times, so five number of times,
six number of times, something like that.
So let's do the most basic thing that we have.
We have let i = 0;
i <= 10;
i++ no semi.
We're gonna break down what this is
in just a second inside of that.
Let's just console.log i.
Now, if we open up, now if we refresh, you see
what we're gonna get is we've looped from zero to 10,
so we've looped 11 times over
and logged out what the i variable is.
So let's break this down.
We said that the first one is an initial expression
so you can think about this as sort of set up for the code
that you're going to write.
The loop starts here.
Second is the condition, and the condition will run
each time before each loop runs, meaning that if this
is true then the loop will run one more time.
If this is false, it will no longer run, and it'll move on
to the next lines of code underneath it.
And then finally, they have the i++, which is the increment,
and in this case, what we're doing is we're just
taking the i, which we've set to zero
and incrementing it by one.
And that allows us to access
this variable called i inside of it.
You may be saying, okay, Wes,
why did you not use const here?
And if I refresh that, you'll see
that the first time, setup runs.
It assigns a variable called i and sets it to zero.
Then what happens is we check if that is less than 10, true.
And then we go ahead and run the code that's in here.
Then it comes back, and then it increments it at the end.
And here, we're saying TypeError:
Assignment to constant variable.
So it's a bit of an issue because you can't increment
a constant variable.
So that's why we are using a let here.
Now, what else can you do?
Well, this is helpful for if you want it to start at, say,
100 and go until, I don't know, 120
and then increment by two, so +=2
or just i is equal to i plus two.
And now you'll see if we refresh this,
starts at 100 goes up by two until it hits 120 and exit.
Because of that, this loop is fairly flexible
in incrementing the ways that we want.
One thing I need to note here is that
notice how there's no semicolon here
if I put a semicolon there, the whole thing is broken.
Why?
I'm not sure.
I'm sure there's a great reason why,
but your ESLint will always catch you on that.
So make sure you don't accidentally
put a semicolon there.
Traditionally, this is used to loop
over something like an array of numbers.
And it very well may be that you see
this in the wild, so I'm gonna show you how this works.
So I can start up another one,
for let i = 0.
And you may be saying, hold on, Wes.
Didn't you already create an i variable here?
Well, that's the beauty of using
let or const in this case is that even though
the code is in here, it's actually scoped
to this block right here, so you are able to reuse it.
And that was great because before we had let and const,
we had var and var variable.
Let just me show you if I changed this to var,
and I were to go underneath here, console.log i,
you see that I actually have this 122 variable
that has incremented, and it's now
it's just a global variable floating out in the open.
And now if I wanna have another loop,
I have to use another variable for i.
Whereas if we use let, it will make sure
that it's scoped to the block.
'Cause remember, let and const are block scoped.
So if you wanted to loop over an array the old way,
we would do for let i = 0;
i is less or equal,
I think less?
Yeah, less than the array length, so say numbers.length;
and then i++, and then we go in here.
We'll just console.log i, see what we got.
We're gonna comma this one out,
and we have zero through 11.
That's because there are 12 items in this numbers,
so let's double check that.
There we go, 12 items.
And now to access the individual number,
you have to use this index to retrieve it
so we will console.log numbers square bracket i;
and that should give us two, 34, three.
You see that they're showing up in here.
That's the way loops used to be done.
Way easier with a for each or a map or a reduce,
something like that, way easier now,
so if you do see this, maybe ask yourself,
can I refactor that to a for loop?
'Cause it's much better.
That is the for loop.
Another place that's useful is in canvas.
If we go back to the Etch-A-Sketch one that we worked on,
let's take a look.
We're on our Etch-a-Sketch, open this up.
Do you remember this one where we were drawing
all over the place?
This canvas element actually has a method on it
called getImageData that will allow us
to pull the stuff out of that canvas.
If I select it here, and I were to say $0,
that gives us the canvas.
And oh, do we have a context variable?
That's what we need to push it, pluck it off of.
Ctx yeah, if I have my context,
and I could say getImageData,
and zero, zero, 100, 100.
What that returns to us is, what I just said is give me
the first 100 pixels by 100 pixels
and what that returns to us is this data array with, what?
40,000 items inside of it.
It's this special kind of array called a clamped array,
and they're used for when you have
very, very, very large arrays.
And if you open it up, actually, this is a bad example.
Let me color some stuff in the top right-hand corner
so we can, there we go.
Let me rerun that 'cause I actually need some data,
open that up, open up my data, open up this.
And you'll see that I get 255, zero, 119.
What does that mean and 255, 255, zero, 119,
255, zero, 119?
What these are are RBGA values,
meaning that I've just pulled out the raw data
from this canvas element,
and it's returning to us for every single pixel in there,
(makes screeching sound) every single little pixel in there,
it returns to us four values.
That little pink right there is four values,
meaning that the red is 255.
The zero is the green, and the 119 is the blue.
And then that returns to us an alpha channel,
which is if it's transparent or not.
And 255 would be totally not transparent,
and zero would be totally transparent, see through.
That's a pretty common thing to do,
and if you wanna to loop over that data,
you have to loop over every single pixel,
meaning that you have to take four at a time.
So a for loop, that can increment itself by four,
instead of by one, is very handy
and that honestly is the only place
that I still use for loop.
But your results may differ, so it's good to know it.
And you probably will run across it
in some other code.
So that is what the for loop is.
Now let's loop at the for of loop.
The for of loop is fairly new to the language,
and it's actually pretty nice.
So what is it?
It's used for looping over iterables.
Remember, what's an iterable?
An iterable is something that has a length.
So it's something that is like a number
or a string, and there's some advanced use cases
where you can have a symbol iterator.
I'm not gonna get into that right now,
but just know that in most cases
you'll use this for an array or for a string.
And the way it works is you say for const,
let's say letter of,
let's go and say name,
and we'll just console.log the letter and refresh.
You'll see now I've looped over each of those,
letter of name, and it will give us each of those letter.
Why would that be better than splitting it
and looping over it with a for each like we've learned?
Well, one thing is that this can handle emojis.
If I were to take a look at, I think it was family.
This is, you can't really see it here,
but this is a peach family.
And if I were to console.log it,
you'll see that it gives me the family
with one boy emoji, which is,
and then it gives you the modifier, which is peach skin.
And if I were to take the name
and call split on it normally,
it freaks out at these emojis
because of the zero-width joiner thing.
That's not a great thing as well.
And if I were to use a spread,
that will give us the little pieces that we want.
Let me put a few more emojis in there.
There is Santa.
There is
couple,
there we go.
Loop over it, you see the family
with two women, two children,
is actually, a woman, woman,
girl child, a boy child, and then these things right here
are what are referred to as zero-width joiners.
That's just showing us that it's made up
of multiple emojis.
There's that.
You can obviously use the spread for that as well.
Let me show you, dot dot dot name.
You'll see that it will split that up as well.
That's one use case.
The other use is something to do with promises.
And we are not hitting that just yet.
However, if you ever need to sequence
a bunch of data, meaning you have to do
one thing after another in a loop,
the for of loop will allow you to do something
called a wait inside of it.
We'll come back to that when we learn promises,
but just know that the for of
is very handy for sequencing promises,
and quite honestly, that's the only use case I use it for.
The for of loop can be used with an array as well,
so for const,
number in numbers,
console.log number.
And it should give us each of the numbers
that are in it and zero through 11,
oh that's in, of.
We want for of.
We're gonna learn about for in next.
There we go.
You see it.
It gives us each of the values in there.
The downside to that versus using
a dot for each is that it doesn't give us the index.
It just gives us the raw value.
It also doesn't allow us to filter or anything like that.
There is that for you.
And then finally we have the for in.
The for in works similarly.
Actually, let me just show you.
Remember when we did in,
and I got zero through 11?
What's actually happening there is that it's giving us
the keys of an object.
The for in is used for looping over keys
of an object.
If I were to, let's give ourselves an object,
const wes is equal to this, name: 'wes', age: 100,
cool is true.
I could go here and say for const prop in wes,
console.log the prop.
And you see it name, age, cool.
That will give us each of the props.
And now you may be asking,
how is that better than our object.entries,
object.keys, or object.values?
And it's not.
I much prefer to use those, but it is there. (laughs)
I know I have to teach you about these things,
and you will come across them.
But quite honestly, I don't use them all that often
except for the use cases that I've been telling you.
There is one sort of gotcha
with the for in versus object.entries,
and I'll show you that now.
It looks ahead to this thing called prototypes,
but if I were to make a baseHumanStats object.
And the baseHumanStats are something like feet: two,
and arms: two, and eyes: two,
head: one, and I were to make a new function
called capital H, Human that takes in a name
and then say this.name = name.
Now, this is going a little bit ahead of ourselves,
but we can now use this Human function to make a wes2.
And we'll say new Human, and we'll say 'wes'.
Now, if I were to take a look at wes2,
you'll see that it has a type of Human,
and the name is equal to "wes".
And if I were to say, how many arms does wes have?
None, but if I take this Human function
and set the prototype to be the baseHumanStats,
now if we take a look at wes2,
still looks the same, but if I were to look at feet
or arms, you see that it is referencing
the values from the prototype.
And what does that mean?
Well, what happens with a prototype is that
when you try to access a property,
it first checks on the object itself
for a property on that.
And if it's not on there, it will look up
the prototype chain, meaning it'll say, okay,
it's not on here.
But maybe the thing that created me has a prototype
that has that value, and it will look it up
in the prototype.
In our case, this prototype has some sort of base values
that it will pull it from.
We'll go much more into that when we hit classes.
But all of that to say, if we do,
console.log Object.keys wes2
are we gonna get name: "wes",
and all of these, or are we just gonna get name of wes?
Refresh, we only get name.
Let's use entries.
You see, we get an array where the name is wes.
But, if I were to say for const prop in wes2,
and console.log the prop,
you'll see that it does grab everything from the prototype
that it was made from, so name, feet, arms, eyes, and head.
If you need to grab the prototype methods and properties,
then you can use a for in loop to grab those.
If you don't need those, which I would say
in most cases you don't, then you're fine
with an object.entries.
Next up, we have the while and do while loops.
Again, these are two other loops I don't use all that often,
but they're good to know how they work
because you do find yourself in little situations
where they are useful.
While will take a condition and run infinitely
until the condition is false.
If we take a look at this, it's while,
and you open up your block,
in here there is a condition,
and we need to check for something.
In our case, I would maybe make a variable called cool
and make that to true.
And we say while cool === true
then we just console.log, 'You are cool'.
Now, this is going to be an infinite loop
because there is no what is called an exit condition,
meaning that there's nothing to stop it from running.
So I might crash my computer.
Let's see, refresh.
This says You are cool.
You see it's updating every so often.
Oh, it actually updates pretty frequently
if you leave your mouse over top of it.
You see it's struggling because this is an infinite loop
and if I were doing anything else in JavaScript,
this would probably make the tab crash
because you have a runaway loop.
You need an exit condition
that will set this thing to be false.
Maybe what we could do is we could say let i = 0;
and we'll say i++, and then we'll say if i > 100,
cool = false.
What should happen after we run this loop 100 times,
we'll set it to false.
And yeah, and now it's, I broke it.
I gotta close it down and open it up.
And you see that it's run it 101 times.
Maybe I should make this set to one,
and it runs it 100 times over.
It's important to note that someone could set
this cool variable in another piece of JavaScript code,
and then the next time it run,
it would check that that is true or false.
That is one way to do it.
The only difference between the while loop
and the do loop is that we have a do
and then a while condition at the end.
And what happens is that the do will run first
and then check the condition after the first run,
whereas this will always check the condition
before the first run and then go ahead and do it.
Quite honestly, I've never needed that in my career before,
but it is there if you need it.
While loops, not all that popular.
You may run into little use cases here or there.
Maybe if I find some other use cases from people telling me
once they've viewed this, I'll add this to that video.
See you in the next one!